doc/src/setup.rst, before:

.. File setup.rst

.. include:: global.rst

.. _Section-Installation:

=====
Setup
=====

Installation and configuration are necessary only if you intend to run |VisiOmatic| locally or as a web server.
If you are only interested in using the default web client as a remote user, you may head directly to the :ref:`web interface section <Section-HowToUse>`.

Installation
============

The easiest way to install |VisiOmatic| is from the shell, through |pip|_:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install visiomatic

If the command above does not work and your operating system still comes with Python 2, try :program:`pip3` instead of |pip|.

On recent systems, the vanilla ``pip install`` command may trigger an "externally managed environment" error, due to `a change in policy <https://peps.python.org/pep-0668/#implementation-notes>`_ to avoid conflicts between the Python package manager and that of your own operating system.
In this case, you should first `set a virtual environment <https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html>`_ to run |VisiOmatic|, or even better, use the |pipx|_ package that will automatically do it for you:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pipx install visiomatic

Checking installation
=====================

Once installation is complete, you may do a simple check of the server component by starting |VisiOmatic| with the default settings:

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic

and pointing your browser to ``http://localhost:8009/api``.
You should land on the page shown below.

.. _Fig_VisiomaticBanner:

.. figure:: figures/visiomatic-banner.*
   :alt: VisiOmatic banner
   :figwidth: 60%
   :align: center


If you have a FITS image in hand (say, ``image.fits``), you can quickly check that |VisiOmatic| works on your machine by typing in a shell window

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic image.fits

A browser window should pop up, and after some time (used for caching the data), the image should appear in the web interface.
Type ``^C`` in the shell window to quit.

Configuration
=============

|VisiOmatic| can operate in a wide variety of environments and is highly configurable.

The command

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic --help

returns a list of all the available options and their default values.
There are three successive levels at which the settings are applied (and overridden) :

#. Built-in default configuration.
#. The configuration file.
#. Command line options.

Default configuration
---------------------

The default configuration is defined `within the code itself <https://github.com/astromatic/visiomatic/blob/main/src/visiomatic/server/settings.py>`_.
The default values are those returned by the ``visiomatic --help`` command.
They are generally appropriate for local use on a "regular" machine.
 
The configuration file
----------------------

A configuration file may be used to store settings that will be applied anytime |VisiOmatic| is started.
The default location of the configuration file depends on the platform and is defined by the |platformdirs|_ library: ``~/.config/visiomatic/visiomatic.conf`` (Linux), ``~/Library/Application Support/visiomatic/visiomatic.conf`` (macOS), or ``C:\Documents and Settings\<User>\Application Data\Local Settings\visiomatic\visiomatic.conf`` (Windows).
The path to the configuration file may be changed using the ``-c`` / ``--config`` command line argument, for example:

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic --config /etc/visiomatic.conf

Editing an existing configuration file is easier than writing one from scratch!
The following command may be used to write (or replace) a default configuration file at the default location:

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic -s

Command line options
--------------------

All configuration file settings may also be changed using arguments to the :program:`visiomatic` command; however the command line syntax differs slightly from that of the configuration file.
For instance, to set the port number to 8010 from the config file one would use the line :param:`port = 8010`, whereas from the command line one could type

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic --port=8010

or

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic --port 8010

or even

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic -p 8010

and boolean command line options do not require to be followed by the :param:`True` value.
For example, the following command runs |VisiOmatic| with the cache cleared at startup:

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic --clear_cache

The same option may be abbreviated

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic -C

Configuration settings
----------------------

Configuration settings are grouped into five sections: `host`, `image`, `server`, `engine`, and `cache`.
The full list of options is listed below; jump to :ref:`the setup guide <Section_SetupGuide>` for use cases.

Host options
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Host options allow you to specify how and where the Visiomatic service runs.

:param:`host` `host`
  This option sets the host name or IP address where the service will run.
  If not specified, it defaults to :param:`localhost`.

:param:`port` `integer`
  Define the port number for the service (<65536).
  The default port number is :param:`8009`.
  Note that without administrator priviledges, only values equal to or above 1024 are allowed.

:param:`root_path` `path`
  Configure the |ASGI|_ root path, which is an advanced setting for specific deployment environments.
  The default value is the empty string.

:param:`access_log`
  Use this option to display the access log, which can be useful for monitoring requests to the server.

:param:`reload`
  This option enables auto-reloading of the server when code changes are detected, which can be convenient for development purposes.
  Note that enabling this option turns off multiple workers.

:param:`workers` `integer`
  Specify the number of worker processes to handle requests.
  By default, this is set to :param:`4`.


Image options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Image options control the default settings for image processing and presentation.

:param:`brightness` `float`
  Set the default brightness for images (between -100.0 and +100.0).
  The default value is :param:`0.0`, indicating no change from the original brightness.

:param:`contrast` `float`
  Adjust the default contrast of images (between 0.01 and 10.0).
  The default value is :param:`1.0`, meaning no change from the original contrast.

:param:`color_saturation` `float`
  Define the default color saturation level (between 0.0 and 5.0).
  The default is :param:`1.5`, which increases the saturation.

:param:`gamma` `float`
  Set the default `gamma correction <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamma_correction>`_ value (between 0.1 and 5.0).
  The default is `2.2`, which is appropriate for `sRGB <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SRGB>`_ displays.

:param:`quality` `integer`
  Determine the default compression quality for images, expressed as a percentage.
  The default value is `97%`, balancing quality and bandwidth requirements.

:param:`tile_size` `shape`
  Specify the shape of image tiles used for processing, in pixels (between 1 and 4096 per axis).
  Note that the vertical size comes first, following the Python convention for image arrays.
  The default tile size is :param:`256,256`.

Server options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Server options configure various aspects of the web server and its endpoints.

:param:`api_path` `path`
  Set the endpoint URL for the web service API.
  The default path is :param:`/api`.

:param:`banner_template` `filename`
  Specify the HTML template file for the service banner.
  The default template is `banner.html`.

:param:`base_template` `filename`
  Define the HTML template file for the web client interface.
  The default is `base.html`.

:param:`client_dir` `directory`
  Point to the directory containing the web client code, including styles and media files.
  By default, this is set to :param:`<install_dir>/client`.

:param:`data_dir` `directory`
  Set the root directory for data storage.
  The default is the current directory (:param:`.`).

:param:`doc_dir` `directory`
  Specify the directory where HTML documentation is built and stored.
  The default is :param:`<install_dir>/doc/build/html`.

:param:`doc_path` `path`
  Set the endpoint URL for accessing HTML documentation.
  The default path is :param:`/manual`.

:param:`extra_dir` `directory`
  Provide an additional directory for storing extra data.
  The default is the current directory (:param:`.`).

:param:`no_browser`
  Use this option to prevent the automatic opening of a web browser when an image filename is provided.

:param:`template_dir` `directory`
  Define the directory containing HTML templates.
  The default is :param:`<install_dir>/templates`.

:param:`userdoc_url` `URL`
  Set the URL endpoint for user documentation.
  The default URL is :param:`/manual/interface.html`.

Engine options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Engine options configure the internal processing engine.

:param:`thread_count` `integer`
  Specify the number of threads the engine uses.
  The default is :param:`10`, allowing for parallel processing of 10 tasks.

Cache options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Cache options manage how image data is cached for improved performance.

:param:`cache_dir` `directory`
  Set the directory where image cache files are stored.
  The default depends on the platform; on Linux, it is :param:`~/.cache/visiomatic`.

:param:`clear_cache`
  Enable this option to clear the image cache on startup, ensuring no cached data from previous runs is used.

:param:`max_cache_image_count` `integer`
  Define the maximum number of images to store in the disk cache.
  The default is :param:`100`.

:param:`max_cache_tile_count` `integer`
  Set the maximum number of image tiles to keep in the memory cache.
  The default is :param:`1000`.

:param:`max_open_files` `integer`:
  Specify the maximum number of files that can be opened simultaneously (between 100 and 1,000,000).
  The default is :param:`10000`.

:param:`ultradict_cache_file` `filename`
  Define the file name for the pickled cache dictionary shared across processes.
  The default depends on the platform; on Linux it is :param:`/dev/shm/visiomatic_cache_dict.pkl`.


.. _Section_SetupGuide:

Setup guide
===========

This section will help you configure |VisiOmatic| for best performance in typical situations.
The default settings are generally appropriate for basic, local usage, but may not be the best compromise when it comes to running |VisiOmatic| on a big server or on specific hardware.


Accessing |VisiOmatic| server from another machine
--------------------------------------------------

There are basically two ways to make your |VisiOmatic| server instance accessible from another machine.

The first is to set :param:`host` to :param:`0.0.0.0` to allow connections from all interfaces, and make sure that your machine firewall has the |VisiOmatic| `TCP port <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_Control_Protocol#TCP_ports>`_ (8009 by default) open.
This can be convenient (although insecure) if you don't have administrator's rights but still want to browse your images from a different machine on a local network.

However the recommended way is to run |VisiOmatic| (or a containerized version of it) behind a web server acting as a reverse proxy (:numref:`Fig_VisiomaticChart`), such as |nginx|_ or |Apache|_ (``httpd`` daemon).
For information, here is a possible example of a reverse-proxy configuration for |Apache| running on a Linux machine with IP address ``myserver.com``, allowing web-clients to communicate remotely and securely with a local |VisiOmatic| server instance:

.. code-block:: apache

  <VirtualHost *:443>

    ServerName myserver.com
    ServerAlias anyalias.com

    # configure SSL
    SSLEngine on

    SSLProxyEngine On
    SSLProxyVerify none
    SSLProxyCheckPeerCN off
    SSLProxyCheckPeerName off
    SSLProxyCheckPeerExpire off
    ProxyPreserveHost Off

    # Use RewriteEngine to handle websocket connection upgrades
    RewriteEngine On
    RedirectMatch permanent ^/vis$ /vis/
    RewriteCond %{HTTP:Connection} Upgrade [NC]
    RewriteCond %{HTTP:Upgrade} =websocket [NC]
    RewriteRule /vis/ws/(.*) ws://127.0.0.1:8009/ws/$1 [NE,P,L]
    RewriteRule /vis/(.*) http://127.0.0.1:8009/$1 [NE,P,L]
    # Proxy to VisiOmatic
    ProxyPass /vis http://127.0.0.1:8009
    ProxyPassReverse /vis http://127.0.0.1:8009

    SSLCertificateFile /etc/letsencrypt/live/myserver.com/fullchain.pem
    SSLCertificateKeyFile /etc/letsencrypt/live/myserver.com/privkey.pem
    Include /etc/letsencrypt/options-ssl-apache.conf
  </VirtualHost>

The HTTPS certificate is obtained from the `LetsEncrypt <https://letsencrypt.org>`_ authority.
In this example, the URL of the |VisiOmatic| client is ``https://myserver.com/vis/``, which means that |VisiOmatic| 's :param:`root_path` option should be set to :param:`/vis`.

Tuning for performance
----------------------

The |VisiOmatic| server component can be resource-intensive.
Using the proper setup will help getting the most out of the computer serving your images.

Parallel processing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`Parallel computing <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_computing>`_ is one way to improve the tile-serving performance of the server.
|VisiOmatic| uses both `multiprocessing <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html>`_ and `multithreading <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_(computing)>`_ to parallelize the processing of images.

.. attention::
   Multiprocessing and multiple workers are currently available only on Linux, because of compatibility issues with some low-level libraries on macOS and Windows.

.. _Section_Workers:

The `multiprocessing` aspect involves several `worker` processes which are handled the task of processing the requests and serving the images.
The number of `workers` can be set with the :param:`workers` option (4 per default on Linux).
The higher the number, the more processes are available to process requests in parallel, but the higher the memory usage.
In the most extreme situation (as many images being cached as workers at a given time), the total memory usage in bytes may temporarily grow as high as :math:`4 \times \sum_{i=1}^{i \le n_W} n_{\rm pix}^{(i)}`, where
:math:`n_W` is the number of `workers` and :math:`n_{\rm pix}^{(i)}` is the number of pixels in all channels in the :math:`i^{\rm th}` largest image to be served.
For example, for a machine with 256GB or physical memory, serving gigapixel-sized images, the maximum recommended number of `workers` would be about 60 (64 minus some margin for the system and for memory caching).
Note that having more `workers` than CPU cores on the machine will not improve serving performance, hence if the machine in the example above has 48 CPU cores in total, then there is a priori no reason for the number of `workers` to exceed 48.
Finally, it is worth stressing that all systems but those equipped with the fastest storage hardware can become `I/O-bound <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I/O_bound>`_ when too many `workers` are operating in parallel.
Limited I/O performance may somewhat be mitigated by the memory cache the operating system provides, although this depends on the number of different images being served at a given time.
Hence it is recommended to act with caution when increasing the number of `workers` to large values.

`Multithreading` is used more sporadically at lower levels, for instance when generating cache data from |MEF|_ files.
It is set by default to half the number of "CPUs" reported by the operating system (which is often the number of physical CPUs).
It is recommended to leave it unchanged, unless one intends to run several instances of |VisiOmatic| on the same machine.

Image caches
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Caching of image data is essential to the good performance of |VisiOmatic|.
Caching of the image tiles computed by the server component occurs at several levels, all of which following the `LRU ("Least-Recently-Used") policy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cache_replacement_policies#Least_recently_used_(LRU)>`_.

Browser cache
"""""""""""""
The first level is that of the web browser, which has its own cache on the client side.
It is particularly useful when displaying animated sequences.
The browser cache does not require specific tuning when using the |VisiOmatic| web client, however it may sometimes interfere with the expected behavior of the visualisation engine when rapidly updating image parameters, and lead to inconsistencies between the displayed tiles.
In this case, clearing the cache of the browser and reloading the page will solve the issue.

Server cache
""""""""""""
The second cache level, which may or may not be present, is that of the (optional) web server acting as a reverse proxy to the |VisiOmatic| server component.
Please check your web server documentation for configuration tips (e.g. `nginx caching <https://docs.nginx.com/nginx/admin-guide/content-cache/content-caching/>`_ or `Apache caching <https://httpd.apache.org/docs/current/caching.html>`_).

The |VisiOmatic| server code itself provides the next two caches, in the form of a memory cache and a disk cache.

Memory tile cache
"""""""""""""""""
The memory cache deals with the JPEG-encoded tiles.
By default, up to 1,000 encoded tiles, or about 20-30 megabytes (per :ref:`worker <Section_Workers>`) are cached in memory.
This limit may be increased or decreased using the :param:`max_cache_tile_count` option.

Disk image cache
""""""""""""""""
Client requests do not deal directly with FITS image arrays.
Instead, they get their data from the tiled, multi-resolution images stored in the |VisiOmatic| LRU disk cache.
The cache data are generated on-the-fly and memory mapped by the server component.
By default, up to 100 image files can be cached on disk.
This limit may be increased or decreased using the :param:`max_cache_image_count` option.

Commit message:

More progress on cache information.

doc/src/setup.rst, after:

.. File setup.rst

.. include:: global.rst

.. _Section-Installation:

=====
Setup
=====

Installation and configuration are necessary only if you intend to run |VisiOmatic| locally or as a web server.
If you are only interested in using the default web client as a remote user, you may head directly to the :ref:`web interface section <Section-HowToUse>`.

Installation
============

The easiest way to install |VisiOmatic| is from the shell, through |pip|_:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pip install visiomatic

If the command above does not work and your operating system still comes with Python 2, try :program:`pip3` instead of |pip|.

On recent systems, the vanilla ``pip install`` command may trigger an "externally managed environment" error, due to `a change in policy <https://peps.python.org/pep-0668/#implementation-notes>`_ to avoid conflicts between the Python package manager and that of your own operating system.
In this case, you should first `set a virtual environment <https://docs.python.org/3/library/venv.html>`_ to run |VisiOmatic|, or even better, use the |pipx|_ package that will automatically do it for you:

.. code-block:: console

    $ pipx install visiomatic

Checking installation
=====================

Once installation is complete, you may do a simple check of the server component by starting |VisiOmatic| with the default settings:

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic

and pointing your browser to ``http://localhost:8009/api``.
You should land on the page shown below.

.. _Fig_VisiomaticBanner:

.. figure:: figures/visiomatic-banner.*
   :alt: VisiOmatic banner
   :figwidth: 60%
   :align: center


If you have a |FITS| image in hand (say, ``image.fits``), you can quickly check that |VisiOmatic| works on your machine by typing in a shell window

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic image.fits

A browser window should pop up, and after some time (used for caching the data), the image should appear in the web interface.
Type ``^C`` in the shell window to quit.

Configuration
=============

|VisiOmatic| can operate in a wide variety of environments and is highly configurable.

The command

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic --help

returns a list of all the available options and their default values.
There are three successive levels at which the settings are applied (and overridden) :

#. Built-in default configuration.
#. The configuration file.
#. Command line options.

Default configuration
---------------------

The default configuration is defined `within the code itself <https://github.com/astromatic/visiomatic/blob/main/src/visiomatic/server/settings.py>`_.
The default values are those returned by the ``visiomatic --help`` command.
They are generally appropriate for local use on a "regular" machine.
 
The configuration file
----------------------

A configuration file may be used to store settings that will be applied anytime |VisiOmatic| is started.
The default location of the configuration file depends on the platform and is defined by the |platformdirs|_ library: ``~/.config/visiomatic/visiomatic.conf`` (Linux), ``~/Library/Application Support/visiomatic/visiomatic.conf`` (macOS), or ``C:\Documents and Settings\<User>\Application Data\Local Settings\visiomatic\visiomatic.conf`` (Windows).
The path to the configuration file may be changed using the ``-c`` / ``--config`` command line argument, for example:

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic --config /etc/visiomatic.conf

Editing an existing configuration file is easier than writing one from scratch!
The following command may be used to write (or replace) a default configuration file at the default location:

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic -s

Command line options
--------------------

All configuration file settings may also be changed using arguments to the :program:`visiomatic` command; however the command line syntax differs slightly from that of the configuration file.
For instance, to set the port number to 8010 from the config file one would use the line :param:`port = 8010`, whereas from the command line one could type

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic --port=8010

or

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic --port 8010

or even

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic -p 8010

and boolean command line options do not require to be followed by the :param:`True` value.
For example, the following command runs |VisiOmatic| with the cache cleared at startup:

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic --clear_cache

The same option may be abbreviated

.. code-block:: console

    $ visiomatic -C

Configuration settings
----------------------

Configuration settings are grouped into five sections: `host`, `image`, `server`, `engine`, and `cache`.
The full list of options is listed below; jump to :ref:`the setup guide <Section_SetupGuide>` for use cases.

Host options
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Host options allow you to specify how and where the Visiomatic service runs.

:param:`host` `host`
  This option sets the host name or IP address where the service will run.
  If not specified, it defaults to :param:`localhost`.

:param:`port` `integer`
  Define the port number for the service (<65536).
  The default port number is :param:`8009`.
  Note that without administrator priviledges, only values equal to or above 1024 are allowed.

:param:`root_path` `path`
  Configure the |ASGI|_ root path, which is an advanced setting for specific deployment environments.
  The default value is the empty string.

:param:`access_log`
  Use this option to display the access log, which can be useful for monitoring requests to the server.

:param:`reload`
  This option enables auto-reloading of the server when code changes are detected, which can be convenient for development purposes.
  Note that enabling this option turns off multiple workers.

:param:`workers` `integer`
  Specify the number of worker processes to handle requests.
  By default, this is set to :param:`4`.


Image options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Image options control the default settings for image processing and presentation.

:param:`brightness` `float`
  Set the default brightness for images (between -100.0 and +100.0).
  The default value is :param:`0.0`, indicating no change from the original brightness.

:param:`contrast` `float`
  Adjust the default contrast of images (between 0.01 and 10.0).
  The default value is :param:`1.0`, meaning no change from the original contrast.

:param:`color_saturation` `float`
  Define the default color saturation level (between 0.0 and 5.0).
  The default is :param:`1.5`, which increases the saturation.

:param:`gamma` `float`
  Set the default `gamma correction <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamma_correction>`_ value (between 0.1 and 5.0).
  The default is `2.2`, which is appropriate for `sRGB <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SRGB>`_ displays.

:param:`quality` `integer`
  Determine the default compression quality for images, expressed as a percentage.
  The default value is `97%`, balancing quality and bandwidth requirements.

:param:`tile_size` `shape`
  Specify the shape of image tiles used for processing, in pixels (between 1 and 4096 per axis).
  Note that the vertical size comes first, following the Python convention for image arrays.
  The default tile size is :param:`256,256`.

Server options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Server options configure various aspects of the web server and its endpoints.

:param:`api_path` `path`
  Set the endpoint URL for the web service API.
  The default path is :param:`/api`.

:param:`banner_template` `filename`
  Specify the HTML template file for the service banner.
  The default template is `banner.html`.

:param:`base_template` `filename`
  Define the HTML template file for the web client interface.
  The default is `base.html`.

:param:`client_dir` `directory`
  Point to the directory containing the web client code, including styles and media files.
  By default, this is set to :param:`<install_dir>/client`.

:param:`data_dir` `directory`
  Set the root directory for data storage.
  The default is the current directory (:param:`.`).

:param:`doc_dir` `directory`
  Specify the directory where HTML documentation is built and stored.
  The default is :param:`<install_dir>/doc/build/html`.

:param:`doc_path` `path`
  Set the endpoint URL for accessing HTML documentation.
  The default path is :param:`/manual`.

:param:`extra_dir` `directory`
  Provide an additional directory for storing extra data.
  The default is the current directory (:param:`.`).

:param:`no_browser`
  Use this option to prevent the automatic opening of a web browser when an image filename is provided.

:param:`template_dir` `directory`
  Define the directory containing HTML templates.
  The default is :param:`<install_dir>/templates`.

:param:`userdoc_url` `URL`
  Set the URL endpoint for user documentation.
  The default URL is :param:`/manual/interface.html`.

Engine options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Engine options configure the internal processing engine.

:param:`thread_count` `integer`
  Specify the number of threads the engine uses.
  The default is :param:`10`, allowing for parallel processing of 10 tasks.

Cache options
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Cache options manage how image data is cached for improved performance.

:param:`cache_dir` `directory`
  Set the directory where image cache files are stored.
  The default depends on the platform; on Linux, it is :param:`~/.cache/visiomatic`.

:param:`clear_cache`
  Enable this option to clear the image cache on startup, ensuring no cached data from previous runs is used.

:param:`max_cache_image_count` `integer`
  Define the maximum number of images to store in the disk cache.
  The default is :param:`100`.

:param:`max_cache_tile_count` `integer`
  Set the maximum number of image tiles to keep in the memory cache.
  The default is :param:`1000`.

:param:`max_open_files` `integer`:
  Specify the maximum number of files that can be opened simultaneously (between 100 and 1,000,000).
  The default is :param:`10000`.

:param:`ultradict_cache_file` `filename`
  Define the file name for the pickled cache dictionary shared across processes.
  The default depends on the platform; on Linux it is :param:`/dev/shm/visiomatic_cache_dict.pkl`.


.. _Section_SetupGuide:

Setup guide
===========

This section will help you configure |VisiOmatic| for best performance in typical situations.
The default settings are generally appropriate for basic, local usage, but may not be the best compromise when it comes to running |VisiOmatic| on a big server or on specific hardware.


Accessing |VisiOmatic| server from another machine
--------------------------------------------------

There are basically two ways to make your |VisiOmatic| server instance accessible from another machine.

The first is to set :param:`host` to :param:`0.0.0.0` to allow connections from all interfaces, and make sure that your machine firewall has the |VisiOmatic| `TCP port <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transmission_Control_Protocol#TCP_ports>`_ (8009 by default) open.
This can be convenient (although insecure) if you don't have administrator's rights but still want to browse your images from a different machine on a local network.

However the recommended way is to run |VisiOmatic| (or a containerized version of it) behind a web server acting as a reverse proxy (:numref:`Fig_VisiomaticChart`), such as |nginx|_ or |Apache|_ (``httpd`` daemon).
For information, here is a possible example of a reverse-proxy configuration for |Apache| running on a Linux machine with IP address ``myserver.com``, allowing web-clients to communicate remotely and securely with a local |VisiOmatic| server instance:

.. code-block:: apache

  <VirtualHost *:443>

    ServerName myserver.com
    ServerAlias anyalias.com

    # configure SSL
    SSLEngine on

    SSLProxyEngine On
    SSLProxyVerify none
    SSLProxyCheckPeerCN off
    SSLProxyCheckPeerName off
    SSLProxyCheckPeerExpire off
    ProxyPreserveHost Off

    # Use RewriteEngine to handle websocket connection upgrades
    RewriteEngine On
    RedirectMatch permanent ^/vis$ /vis/
    RewriteCond %{HTTP:Connection} Upgrade [NC]
    RewriteCond %{HTTP:Upgrade} =websocket [NC]
    RewriteRule /vis/ws/(.*) ws://127.0.0.1:8009/ws/$1 [NE,P,L]
    RewriteRule /vis/(.*) http://127.0.0.1:8009/$1 [NE,P,L]
    # Proxy to VisiOmatic
    ProxyPass /vis http://127.0.0.1:8009
    ProxyPassReverse /vis http://127.0.0.1:8009

    SSLCertificateFile /etc/letsencrypt/live/myserver.com/fullchain.pem
    SSLCertificateKeyFile /etc/letsencrypt/live/myserver.com/privkey.pem
    Include /etc/letsencrypt/options-ssl-apache.conf
  </VirtualHost>

The HTTPS certificate is obtained from the `LetsEncrypt <https://letsencrypt.org>`_ authority.
In this example, the URL of the |VisiOmatic| client is ``https://myserver.com/vis/``, which means that |VisiOmatic| 's :param:`root_path` option should be set to :param:`/vis`.

Tuning for performance
----------------------

The |VisiOmatic| server component can be resource-intensive.
Using the proper setup will help getting the most out of the computer serving your images.

Parallel processing
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

`Parallel computing <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parallel_computing>`_ is one way to improve the tile-serving performance of the server.
|VisiOmatic| uses both `multiprocessing <https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html>`_ and `multithreading <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thread_(computing)>`_ to parallelize the processing of images.

.. attention::
   Multiprocessing and multiple workers are currently available only on Linux, because of compatibility issues with some low-level libraries on macOS and Windows.

.. _Section_Workers:

The `multiprocessing` aspect involves several `worker` processes which are handled the task of processing the requests and serving the images.
The number of `workers` can be set with the :param:`workers` option (4 per default on Linux).
The higher the number, the more processes are available to process requests in parallel, but the higher the memory usage.
In the most extreme situation (as many images being cached as workers at a given time), the total memory usage in bytes may temporarily grow as high as :math:`4 \times \sum_{i=1}^{i \le n_W} n_{\rm pix}^{(i)}`, where
:math:`n_W` is the number of `workers` and :math:`n_{\rm pix}^{(i)}` is the number of pixels in all channels in the :math:`i^{\rm th}` largest image to be served.
For example, for a machine with 256GB or physical memory, serving gigapixel-sized images, the maximum recommended number of `workers` would be about 60 (64 minus some margin for the system and for memory caching).
Note that having more `workers` than CPU cores on the machine will not improve serving performance, hence if the machine in the example above has 48 CPU cores in total, then there is a priori no reason for the number of `workers` to exceed 48.
Finally, it is worth stressing that all systems but those equipped with the fastest storage hardware can become `I/O-bound <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I/O_bound>`_ when too many `workers` are operating in parallel.
Limited I/O performance may somewhat be mitigated by the memory cache the operating system provides, although this depends on the number of different images being served at a given time.
Hence it is recommended to act with caution when increasing the number of `workers` to large values.

`Multithreading` is used more sporadically at lower levels, for instance when generating cache data from |MEF|_ files.
It is set by default to half the number of "CPUs" reported by the operating system (which is often the number of physical CPUs).
It is recommended to leave it unchanged, unless one intends to run several instances of |VisiOmatic| on the same machine.

Image caches
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Caching of image data is essential to the good performance of |VisiOmatic|.
Caching of the image tiles computed by the server component occurs at several levels, all of which following the `LRU ("Least-Recently-Used") policy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cache_replacement_policies#Least_recently_used_(LRU)>`_.

Browser cache
"""""""""""""
The first level is that of the web browser, which has its own cache on the client side.
It is particularly useful when displaying animated sequences.
The browser cache does not require specific tuning when using the |VisiOmatic| web client, however it may sometimes interfere with the expected behavior of the visualisation engine when rapidly updating image parameters, and lead to inconsistencies between the displayed tiles.
In this case, clearing the cache of the browser and reloading the page will solve the issue.

Server cache
""""""""""""
The second cache level, which may or may not be present, is that of the (optional) web server acting as a reverse proxy to the |VisiOmatic| server component.
Please check your web server documentation for configuration tips (e.g. `nginx caching <https://docs.nginx.com/nginx/admin-guide/content-cache/content-caching/>`_ or `Apache caching <https://httpd.apache.org/docs/current/caching.html>`_).

The |VisiOmatic| server code itself provides the next two caches, in the form of a memory cache and a disk cache.

Memory tile cache
"""""""""""""""""
The memory cache deals with the JPEG-encoded tiles.
By default, up to 1,000 encoded tiles, or about 20-30 megabytes (per :ref:`worker <Section_Workers>`) are cached in memory.
This limit may be increased or decreased using the :param:`max_cache_tile_count` option.

Disk image cache
""""""""""""""""
The client requests managed by the server component do not deal directly with |FITS| image arrays.
Instead, they get their data from the tiled, multi-resolution images stored in the |VisiOmatic| LRU disk cache.
The cache data are generated on-the-fly and memory mapped by the server component.
By default, up to 100 image files can be cached on disk.
This limit may be increased or decreased using the :param:`max_cache_image_count` option.

The directory path where the cached data are written and read can be specified with the :param:`cache_dir` option. The default path depends on the platform; on Linux, it is :param:`~/.cache/visiomatic`.
One should ensure that enough disk space is available for the cached data, knowing that an image with :math:`n_{\rm pix}` pixels uses about :math:`10\,n_{\rm pix}` bytes of cache disk space. 
The read/write performance of the device that carries the cache directory largely defines the performance and responsiveness of the |VisiOmatic| server component.
Hence make sure that the cache directory is located on the fastest `block device <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Device_file#Block_devices>`_ the server machine has access too, ideally a local, recent `solid state drive <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solid-state_drive>`_.
Another possibility, if the machine has enough memory, is to use a `RAM drive <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RAM_drive>`_.
A RAM drive provides the best possible cache performance, however the cache will not survive a reboot.
